---
layout: post
---

I had never realized just how much of my free time would be lost once I left college and went into the workforce.

In college, I eventually developed a skillset such that I was capable of compressing all of my most vital work into a few hours.  Once this was finished, all I had to do was attend my classes, and then I could essentially do whatever I wanted for the entire rest of the day.

Food was prepared for me and I had to do zero dishes, I did not have to pay utilities or drive my car that often, and I only had a small dorm to dust every once in awhile.  Maximum privilege and coddling.  And I still thought I did not really have enough free time.

Enter the workforce, where you have to stay 8 hours per day every single Monday through Friday at your desk, regardless of how productive you are or how much work you get done ahead of time.  Nevermind that researchers have found that the cream of the crop in all fields including music, mathematics, writing, etc. can only do up to 4 hours of truly productive, meaningful, and creative work per day.  Is something wrong here?  Probably, but that's not my reason for writing this.  Not that anyone will actually read it.

I strongly disliked my last job, and I disliked the area that I lived in even worse.  Around 90% of the time, I would wake up in bed after a bad night of sleep and be unhappy that I had to drag myself to work and spend 8 hours there, only to come home exhausted and unable to do anything else besides heat up some food and go to bed, and then repeat the process.  Nonetheless, I persevered for around 9 months until I decided that enough was enough.  All of the software engineers around me, who had also recently graduated and who were also working their first job, used to go on about how they had to stay 1 - 1.5 years at their first job; no, not just them, but *everyone* had to spend this much time at their first job, or they would absolutely not be able to find another job after that!  

Oh no! 

As with most things, when people believe that they have objective knowledge about an ostensibly black and white reality, they're probably wrong, and they probably just read it somewhere on the internet and haven't thought about it for more than 10 seconds.  There seems to be a loophole in everything.

So what did I do?  I said fuck it, and I left.  I left my job and my apartment behind, and I was unemployed, because the prospect of having to work or live there any longer outweighed the stress of unemployment and impact on my self image that unemployment would have.  I'd rather have no job and no money than have to step into that loud open floor plan full of humans packed in there like sardines, working on a project I could care less about day in and day out.  No matter how many times I tried to convince myself that it wasn't so bad, that I should be happy just to have a job, that I was simply ungrateful, when it came right down to it, I was dissatisfied *at best*. We have only a single life, and I'll be damned if I spend it miserable when I'm capable of changing the situation.  Fear prevents a lot of people from change, and this is something I had to overcome myself.

Luckily, my dad let me stay with him at his apartment until I could get back on my feet and get a job.  After a week or so of recuperation, I started developing a plan of action to get myself a new job within a month or two.  Things like updating my resume, spending a certain amount of hours doing programming interview questions daily, developing ideas for personal projects and working on them so I had something to talk about in interviews, brushing up on conceptual programming interview questions, recapping my experiences at my previous job.  I had no job and I needed one even though my dad said I could stay with him for as long as I needed to, and I worked relentlessly to get it, immersing myself deep in software interview questions and algorithms and designing features for my personal projects while simultaneously learning new tools, frameworks, and APIs.  The whole time, I was applying to job after job that I thought would be a good fit for me.  The whole time, I was also having an existential crisis and wondering if I should really stay in the field of software engineering.

The people who said it would be hard to get a job if you didn't spend *X* amount of time at your first one?  Bullshit.  I had several interviews and phone screens from various different companies, and even though I was unemployed and only spent a meager 9 months at my first job, I was eventually offered a position at the company which was my number one pick by completely blowing the interview away.

And here I am.  And yes, it's fucking awesome working at this new job.  I work on projects that I'm passionate about and that are having a real, tangible impact on our nation's armed forces, I'm given a ton of freedom and personal space, the building that I work in is top notch and is full of professional, kind people, and my benefits are better than before.  Leaving my old job and life behind was one of the best decisions I've made as a man, not only because I left on my own terms, ignoring what others had to say about the odds being stacked against me, but also the fact that I was able to overcome the fear of uncertainty.

I'm realizing how simplistic and unsophisticated my writing has become since all I've been doing is programming and math for the past year or so.  Writing these essays, if not writing short stories, should be something I get around to soon.

Regardless, what I wanted to *really* talk about today was the balance of professional work and life.  As I mentioned earlier, spending 40 hours per week at a job, no matter how much you enjoy it, subjectively doesn't leave enough time to do other things.  In a way, this is actually good.  You have a stable, predictable structure, in which you can plan the rest of your pursuits around.  If you choose to look at stuff on your phone, or waste time googling pointless things and surfing the internet, or even just sit around doing nothing, it all adds up and you have even less time to do anything meaningful and fulfilling.  If you keep this up, you realize that a year has passed and all you've done is go to work, waste time and eat dinner when you got home, went to sleep, and repeated the process.  It sort of makes you into an empty shell of a human.  I'm speaking from experience here.

What I've been working on is trying to change this.  Many software engineers feel the need to come home from 8 hours of sitting in front of code, and then code some more in front of their computer working on "personal projects".  This would be fine if they had a burning passion for coding, as I'm sure some do, but I think that more engineers than we care to admit often do this out of fear.  Fear that they won't stay relevant in their field, that they won't be seen as passionate about software.  After all, everyone on reddit told them that they should work on projects in addition to being employed full time, or they would become obsolete.

I don't buy any of it, and I refuse to incorporate this set of beliefs in my life.

You spend an entire 8+ hours at work every day.  I think this is more than enough time to develop incredible software engineering skills and learn new things, provided that you remain focused and diligent throughout the shift.  When your time is up at work, and you've done everything you can to solve problems efficiently with carefully crafted code while learning new things in the process, you should not feel obligated to go home and continue coding out of fear that you may be laid off and not stay relevant in your field.  There are exceptions to this of course, like if someone is working at a job with extremely outdated technologies, or if someone wants to move into another domain within tech.  In that case, yes, you should feel obligated to continue working after your shift is over, but for the vast majority of people, I think this fear is unfounded, and I will not be a part of it.  Others are free to be a part of it if they think it is truly benefitting them, of course.  I won't take your right to be perpetually paranoid away.

So, what do I do when I get off work now?  I used to think that it would be best to leave my free time spontaneous and unstructured, doing whatever came to mind.  This should be more "relaxing" and "rejuvinating."  However, this was a recipe for hardly getting anything meaningful done besides playing a video game for 10 minutes or surfing the web.  I ended up structuring my free time.  With structure and plans come results, despite the perception that structure should not be applied to relaxation/free time.

I keep track of the subjects/online courses I am currently learning and the ones I want to do in the future.  I keep track of the books I'm reading now and would like to read in the future using Goodreads.  I maintain a daily TO-DO of things so I can establish habits like meditation and deep work.  Shit, I'm even thinking about playing only one or two video games at a time from my Steam library of 70 games so I can see them through to completion and not encourage the habit of sporadically jumping from one thing to the next in a state of shallowness.

The things I'm doing right now in my free time have nothing to do with coding.  I'm taking a Complex Analysis course, reading Metro 2033 and Peridido Street Station, meditating, occasionally playing video games and watching shows, and trying to keep up with my bodyweight workouts.  Once I'm finished with the complex analysis course, I'm going to get around to programming microcontrollers.  Realizing that I don't really have that many hobbies outside of taking technical courses online, reading books, and watching anime, I have recently picked up a lockpicking hobby.  I just got my new set in the mail, and I'm going to learn how to do that, because I think it would be awesome to have skills in such an esoteric and seemingly magical domain.

Disregarding my tangent, the point I'm trying to drive home is the fact that I'm working full time as a software engineer and I come home and do nothing related to software everyday, yet I'm still employed with very positive feedback from my manager, and I haven't been more content in a very long time.

I still have a lot of anxiety about not doing everything that I want to.  Not having the time or energy to read all the books I want to, learn all I want to, create all I want to, develop all the skills I want to.  That will probably never go away.  However, the closest I can get to putting this anxiety to rest is structuring my free time and training myself for deep work and single tasking, honing in on one thing at a time and seeing it through to completion while eliminating any form of shallow internet surfing or mobile phone usage.  I have this vision in my head that I become someone with inhuman levels of concentration, perseverence, and self control, but most of all, someone who is proud that they are able to stick to their values and reach their goals, so that is what I work to do.  All of these qualities lay in direct opposition to our current society full of immediate gratification, short attention spans, and shallowness.  A society where people spend years of their life posting pictures on social media and scrolling through pictures of other people all day with a side serving of reading garbage on the internet, and then wonder why they're miserable, broke, and going nowhere to speak of.  A society where a human being cannot read 3 sentences out of a novel without being distracted and moving onto something else.  

This is a tremendously alarming and pervasively damaging paradigm we've entered into, and luckily, I think people are starting to wake up and see just how deeply we've sunk ourselves into holes of shallowness.
