---
layout: post
---

For the past few months, I've really been struggling with regards to free time activities and hobbies.  I've had a stint of studying every day for an IT certification, I've tried implementing a daily 20 minute meditation (and have actually succeeded for the most part), I've been scattered between learning multiple different subjects and then dropping them cold when I question the value of them or find something more interesting.  I want to start writing short stories or finding an outlet to express my creativity in general.  I want to learn electrical engineering.  I want to work on microcontrollers.  I want to learn Japanese.  I want to make a video game.  Of course, there's not enough time to do all of this, and I can only realistically focus on a handful of things at a time.  Furthermore, choosing any one of these comes at the cost of not choosing the others, and I have a limited number of breaths left.  For many of these things, I've considered that perhaps I only idealize the *idea* of doing it or learning it, and not the actual thing itself.  But that's a topic for another time.

Along the way, I've done things which would not be considered "productive" by the average person.  I've played a lot of video games at times, I've read visual novels (not a traditional "book," i.e. not actually productive or helpful in the eyes of others), and I've pretty much sat around like a vegetable and stared off into space, not doing anything in particular for long stretches of time.  Unfortunately, things that do not directly contribute to monetary gain, professional or intellectual advancement, or improving yourself in some way, at least superficially or traditionally, are deemed a "waste of time" by the modern world.

The thing about this though, is that it is incorrect in its assumptions.  This is a value based judgment, and is therefore subjective by nature.  Let me explain.

Without our own biases and value based judgments, nothing has any inherent meaning.  Maybe it does not make any sense to talk about things *without* implying that our own biases and subjective perceptions will be involved.  It's impossible to separate the two, at least as far as I can tell.

What this means is that when someone deems something as a "waste of time," "unnecessary," or "harmful," what they actually mean is that according to their specific and personal subjective values, which may or may not have been substantially influenced by their environment without a second thought on the victim's behalf, an activity you are partaking in is not helpful to them *individually*.  This personal value judgment is then, usually unknowingly while on autopilot mode, applied to an external party, a.k.a. an NPC, a.k.a. another human being with their own set of subjective values.

Look, what I'm saying is the following: no one has any right to apply their own set of values to another person.  By their very nature, values are subjective, and they are completely dependent upon the goals that an individual strives for.  Do you want more money?  Well yes, playing video games all day is a waste of time.  However, what if you have enough money and your goal is to enjoy your life by doing things that bring you happiness?  Is playing video games a waste of time now?  What about if someone just wants to smoke weed and watch TV shows all day for the rest of their life?  I would personally not find this fulfilling, but if the individual who does this claims that these activities bring them fulfillment and align with their own goals, then there's absolutely nothing wrong with it.

One could probably argue that my own argument turns into a justification for bad behaviors and addictions.  However, the thing about bad behaviors and addictions is that they eventually lead to misery and self destruction.  Not many people value misery and self destruction, but if they do indeed value these things and these are their goals, then I say that there is nothing wrong with their bad behaviors and addictions.  It is not my place to say so, because me saying so would only mean that in my specific and individual case, I do not value self destruction, therefore, they also should not value self destruction.

I swear, I'm not trying to make a case for my high amount of hours on the Witcher 3.  At least, not consciously.

You see, as I've gotten older, I've stopped giving a fuck about a lot of things.  When I was younger, I was very into "self improvement" and "productivity."  Don't get me wrong, I still am to some extent.  However, my ego no longer grasps at them to form a sense of identity and purpose - they are merely tools and behaviors that I use to bring myself fulfillment and meet my own goals.  When these things were my life, I became very neurotic, unable to enjoy anything that wasn't contributing directly to my intellectual or professional development.  This led to depression and a crippling sense of perfectionism and self criticism at every action.  It was exhausting, and paradoxically, served to inhibit me from fully actualizing the goals I originally sought.  If I hadn't gotten past this paradigm, I would've spent my entire ephemeral human existence - the only one that I have as far as I'm aware - spinning my wheels.  An exercise in futility.  And for what?  For some extra money in the bank that I don't need?  For neural circuits to temporarily fire in other people's brains in a pattern that indicates that they approve of me and see me as someone special and dedicated?  For me to finally reach a goal that I've worked so long for, only to feel hollow once I finally reach it, looking for the next hit of dopamine to give my life meaning and help me get out of bed in the morning?

This resurgence in "self help" and "productivity" in popular online culture is actually sickening to me.  It's not because most of it is bullshit.  It's not because I tend to rebel against anything that gets too popular like a true edge lord.  It's not because most of it doesn't get to the root of the issue.  And finally, it's not because most of it doesn't work (success is built upon consistent habits and dedication over an extended period of time, not a quick hit of motivation from someone on the internet giving you a list of 10 motivational quotes that will surely change your life).  It unnerves me because from what I've seen, the people who preach these things simultaneously think that their doctrine is the only correct one and must be applied to every other person, or the person is not good enough.  I don't want it to seem like I'm blatantly thinking in black and white here - there are always exceptions and not everyone meets this criteria.  The point I want to get across, however, is I think that the self help industry is doing more harm than good for the most part. 

"I'm up every morning at 5AM in the gym while everyone else is asleep."  "Most people are just playing video games or watching TV on the weekend, but not me - I'm working day and night on my personal project and making money."  "I've traveled to tons of different countries in the world and posted pictures to instagram at all of them, and what, you just live in your apartment and go to work every day while I have an online business?"

Who gives a fuck ladies and gentleman?  These statements serve no other purpose than to confirm someone's shaky sense of self and temporarily distract them from the fact that we are born into a world by chance and then die a meaningless death, and no one and nothing is telling anyone how to live their fleeting existence in between these two points.  Many people have no choice but to outwardly express these thoughts about their behavior; they must have some sort of external factor validate their worth, because their own is not good enough and never has been.  And I speak from experience here, because like I said, there was a time when I was like this too - when my younger self thought that it was superior to the average person in many ways because of my drive, habits, behaviors, beliefs, and thoughts.  But then I took a step back and started to see: not only was I being a delusional, self-righteous asshole, but neither my own nor anyone else's values have any objective meaning, and neither is objectively better than the other.  They are just different. Only this much can be said.

So, what is my point here?  I don't feel bad about playing video games anymore, or doing anything which I enjoy substantially but is not viewed by others as "productive" or "useful" or "good".  I do not use these activities as a means of procrastination, and my life is in order and I'm supporting myself financially while doing well at my job.  My values tell me that it is okay to fully enjoy escaping into fantasy worlds when these criteria are met, and I should not feel guilty for doing so.

I know that at the end of my days, I will be glad that I chose to experience the story of something like [The House in Fata Morgana](https://store.steampowered.com/app/303310/The_House_in_Fata_Morgana/) rather than stressing out over having enough energy after work to continue coding deep into the night just to become "the best," whatever the fuck that even means. 

These are my own values.  I have no intention of projecting them onto others - everyone is free to do what they wish, whether it's building the next technological empire and donating most of their money to end world hunger or simply staring at themselves in their computer screen reflection in regret and emptiness after what is deemed by an internet comment as "not their proudest fap."  While I would advocate for the former, I would not go out of my way to judge you for the latter, because we all end up in the same place at the end.

I will admit, however, that I'd like to invite you to maybe try some of my own values out for yourself.  In other words, if you find yourself being overly strict, being a perfectionist, or becoming depressed and anxious from the amount of pressure you experience - try letting everything go for awhile each day and doing something you really enjoy while not giving a fuck about either what anyone else thinks of you or what your own inner critic thinks of you.  Get in a state of flow.  Experience pure perception without an ego.  As I experience this phenomenon more and more, I want others to as well.

At the end of the day, I think it's helpful to realize the painfully beautiful absurdity of existence, and to remember that we are "condemned to freedom" as Sartre said; that we are responsible for every single one of our choices, and only we can make them.
