---
layout: post
---

This is something that I’ve wanted to write about for so long now, because I think it’s just more than a minor annoyance that people face in their lives.  I think that it’s fundamentally harmful and damaging to the psyche of our species.

In varying degrees and for different reasons, I think that the majority of people in modern society are addicted to the internet or at least the services it provides.  It can take the form of social media addiction, YouTube addiction, Netflix addiction, and even Googling addiction.  I’m not going to go into what constitutes an addiction, either behaviorally or biochemically, because I’m sure we all intuitively know what is meant by an addiction to social media for example.  It is no longer extreme to call it an addiction - there are many studies and general research that have been performed on this topic now as rates of depression and anxiety have skyrocketed since the advent of social media and smartphones.

For me, my addiction to the internet was actually an addiction to the internet itself.  More specifically, it was an addiction to sucking in massive amounts of information via Google and forums.  Always looking for new things.  Always trying to acquire that stronger hit of dopamine, often through esoteric and otherwise completely useless subjects and pieces of information that would serve me zero benefit in any facet of my life.  Constantly taking in the opinions of *probably* insane people who spent their life in a dark room on the internet.  Rapidly skimming YouTube and Reddit comments.  Punching in new search terms in Google.  Their words and opinions would buzz around in my head for long after I turned the computer off, which was often far later than I had planned. 

It wasn’t just trying to seek that hit of dopamine from novel information.  The internet provided a means for me to distract myself from what was going on with my life.  My experiences in this state of mind always coincided with some issue present in my life that I was not directly confronting and taking care of.  Whether it was a build up of stress from college,  an unhappiness with the path I was taking, or general existential dread that sapped me of my energy on top of the loneliness and disconnectedness from people in the real world - a temporary respite was always surfing the internet (something that required absolutely no effort on my behalf) to fill my mind with useless and oftentimes frankly harmful information so I could get that dopamine high and drown my other worries out.  It paradoxically made things worse.  Hours were wasted, I had procrastinated, and now I was dealing with a noisy mind muddled and clogged by irrelevancies and emotionally evocative snippets of pseudo intellectual drivel on top of worrying about the important assignment that was due tomorrow.  What the hell was I doing with my life?  Did other people also suffer from this?

As far back as my sophomore year of college, I knew that something was intuitively wrong with what I was doing, and looking around me, what many other people seemed to be doing without realizing it.  I began doing research and ironically stumbled across things such as Reddit’s *r/nosurf* forum where people actively tried to avoid internet surfing, social media, and general electronic stimulation.  I resonated with a lot of their experiences.  I also read the book *The Shallows* by Nicholas Carr - a common recommendation in subreddits like this which focused on the impact the internet and technology were having on our brains.  Everything started coming together and I became more confident in my observations and conclusions that I'd reached.

I had realized that symptoms were manifesting themselves as a result of my behavior.  It was hard for me to concentrate for more than 30 or so seconds on any demanding task without feeling a need to do something else.  To Google something and skim an article or forum comments.  To check my cell phone to see if I received any text messages.  To skim a youtube video while scrolling down every few seconds to see what everyone else was saying in the comments section.  Watching a movie or even playing a video game was nearly impossible if you can believe that, nevermind trying to quietly solve a physics problem for homework.  This was internet-induced ADD, and it was severe.

It became quite difficult for me to think for myself.  I had to consult the internet for the vast majority of decisions I made, always trying to make the decisions that would align with what other people thought were correct or worked for them in their own experience.  Every time I thought or felt something of interest, I’d quickly google it to see if other people thought or felt the same way in my moments of boredom and isolation.  I realize this sounds absolutely absurd.  And it does.  It actually disgusts me that I did this.  Repulses me.  Unfortunately, I was not the only one who did such things - the fact that these things existed on the internet and I could access to them was proof that there were people like me who lacked internal and real life guidance, confidence, and a stable sense of purpose and self.

Day by day, I built myself back up.  It’s still a work in progress as most things are.  But I’ve made great strides to improve my concentration, problem solving, and decision making capabilities.  Extreme times call for extreme measures.  I’ve lived with a flip phone.  I still use [Cold Turkey](https://getcoldturkey.com/) to block the vast majority of things on the internet so I only have the capabilities to use the internet for educational/work purposes, gaming, and occasionally watching an anime or movie.  I try to meditate daily and focus on my breath.  I try to read good books every day, the kind of reading that requires sustained concentration so you can effectively understand what’s going on with plot and character development.  You know, the kind of reading where your mind is absorbing new vocabulary and creative syntactical structures instead of the typo-laden, insane, and immature bullshit you might see in a YouTube comments section.  I’ve worked to define and live by what I value regardless of what other people might think of it, which makes it easier for me to make my own decisions and learn from my mistakes.  It’s very difficult for me, even now, but the payoff is immense.  It feels like I'm really living life as it's meant to be lived now.

Just as we put the right high quality foods into our bodies to keep it healthy and strong, so must we put the correct information into our minds to keep ourselves on the right path.  We must make an extra effort to filter out the extraneous and harmful in our age of information, and instead take in what benefits us and helps us to learn and grow.

Ultimately, I’m putting all of this here as a reminder of my decision to distance myself as much as possible from internet usage and not fall into my bad habits again.  I slip up sometimes and I told myself that 2020 was the year that I would get past all of this and not look back.  A life where I use the internet primarily for work, education, and other things that benefit me.  No sitting on Reddit for hours reading what a bunch of people who sound like the same exact socially awkward middle class white dude in their 20’s have to say about a decision or opinion that is decided not by themselves, but by the brainwashed echo-chamber hivemind that they comprise.  I'm not denying that Reddit and other forums have benefits, including offering a sense of community to lonely individuals.  I had great experiences in the Soulsborne community, for example, and I found that there were many people who were also skeptical of the internet and electronic device usage on *r/nosurf*.  I will say though, that overall, I think it does more harm than good and serves as an outlet of hatred and neurosis that people are hesitant to express in real life while simulatenously feeding into that desire to be in a safe echo chamber where your views are never challenged and everyone agrees with you and validates what you think.  It is the perfect medicine to treat the symptoms of a civilization that is lonely, disconnected from the real world, and suffers from imposter syndrome and a perpetual fear of missing out.

I want to get off the internet and into the real world and my real life.  I want laser-like concentration and focus - the ability to go deep on difficult subjects so I can learn what I want and create what I want.  The ability to maintain a state of flow that will contribute to a feeling of satisfaction for my life.  The trait of having the courage and grit to make decisions for myself that align with my values and standards, disregarding popular opinion or wisdom in favor of the unconventional and independent.  A clear mind that is unburdened by cognitive dissonance and nourished by quality information instead of infected with the pollution of internet comments and videos.  Someone who is calm, reassured, and can help other people effectively with problems that are ailing them.  Someone with the guts to take risks and accept and learn from whatever the consequences may be.  Someone who does things for himself and people he cares about instead of someone who does things to project a positive image to society at large so he can be admired and envied.  A self contained vessel instead of a hollow shell filled with the short, text-based-snippet-views and opinions of biased internet nerds.  To me, this is living a life that is worth living.  This is the vision that I work towards each and every day when I wake up and I'm tempted to turn on my cell phone before getting out of bed.
